# PMEL-Hollings-eDNA-Hypoxia-2024

## Questions/to-do before making public:

- Zack: I have a note that says "JV = Jonah Ventures, the DNA metabarcoding service we use" - is this an appropriate definition for "JV" as a directory name? I was using my understanding based on lab meeting notes.

This workflow processes a variety of environmental data and pairs it with environmental DNA species detection data by date and time. These directories and files are listed approximately in the order in which they should be run, but the most accurate order for this workflow is in the flowchart.

Eleanor Crotty's 2024 Hollings Scholarship project: Leveraging environmental DNA approaches to understand impacts of episodic hypoxia events on Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary marine ecosystems. In addition to this `README` file, this repository also contains several PDF files called "Hollings Project Workflow *", which are flowcharts explaining how all of these .Rmd files and data sources connect, focused on the inputs and outputs that are critical to replicate my workflow and generate the final dataset of species detections with associated environmental data.

## Directories
- `OCNMS_Hypoxia`: Environmental data cleaning and combining. Main sources are OCNMS CTD casts and the Teawhit Head mooring's 42 meter depth sensor (TH042). The folder also includes satellite data and data from the Cha'ba NEMO mooring that I did not end up using.
- `OCNMS_sample_metadata_zjd`: Contains metadata and all Jonah Ventures sequencing outputs from the samples, as well as code to clean, pivot, and combine with the Ocean Molecular Ecology group's metadata.
- `OCNMS_eDNA`: Environmental DNA metadata and data cleaning and combining. Contains eDNA species detection data that is pivoted and combined with metadata, as well as code that cleans the species detection data.
- `OCNMS_Project`: Combining the environmental DNA data with the environmental data. Also includes code to compare sampling dates from the metadata with the environmental data to identify gaps in the needed data.
- Each directory has subdirectories `Data` (inputs), `Outputs` (outputs, usually cleaned or filtered data), and `Plots` (any plots saved from code in the parent directory)

## File Details

### Files in `OCNMS_Hypoxia`
This directory contains code for cleaning oceanographic data from a mooring, CTD casts, satellite (VIIRS and MODIS), and NEMO (nearby moored profiler at Cha'ba mooring, data provided as .mat files). It also contains code for combining the mooring and CTD data for use in `OCNMS_Project`. The code for combining the satellite data with the mooring + CTD data is in `OCNMS_Project/EnvironmentalData2.Rmd`. The code for combining the NEMO data with the mooring + CTD data is in `OCNMS_eDNA/EnvironmentalDataxSampleDates.Rmd`.

- `Mooring_Data_Exploration.Rmd`: Produces plots of TH042 data and cleans the data from the mooring. **Important output: `OCNMS_Mooring_CleanData.csv`**
- `CTD_Data_Exploration.Rmd`: Produces plots of CTD data and exports the clean CTD data, which is averaged over 30-45 meters depth in order to match the TH042 data. This CTD data was pre-processed using code from @DiatomSetta. **Important output: `OCNMS_CTD_TH042ext_CleanData.csv`**
- *`CTD_` and `Mooring_Data_Exploration.Rmd` both include code to make the two datasets compatible by renaming variables, formatting the dates as POSIXct, etc.*
- `HypoxiaTimeSeries.Rmd`: Combines CTD and mooring data and makes some graphs to compare them. **Important output: `EnvironmentalDataset1.csv`**
- `NEMO_Data_Exploration.Rmd` and `Satellite_Data_Exploration.Rmd` are both attempts at investigating alternate sources of data to fill the gap in mooring data in 2023. These data sources did not match well with TH042 in 2021-22, so I did not use them for 2023.
- `EnvironmentalData2.Rmd` combines satellite data with CTD and mooring data and makes some plots of this. Satellite data is not consistent with data at depth so I did not use it. Must be run after `HypoxiaTimeSeries.Rmd` if you are running the whole workflow with different data.
- `Satellite_Data_Exploration_files` has some PDFs of maps of the study area that get generated by the mapping function I use throughout the folder.

[Hollings Project Workflow-EnvData.pdf](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/16059843/Hollings.Project.Workflow-EnvData.pdf)

### Files in `OCNMS_sample_metadata_zjd/OCNMS`
*This data and code was provided by Zachary Gold and modified for this workflow by Ella Crotty.* JV = Jonah Ventures, the DNA metabarcoding service we use (*sic, this is my understanding from lab meetings*)

- `JV_bioinformatics` contains the results of DNA metabarcoding from the OCNMS eDNA samples, as well as the JV sample data that is used to combine the JV data with the OME metadata. Sub-folders contain the results from different primers.
- `OCNMS_JV2_sample_metadata.Rmd` is an example of how to filter the data, focused on Alaska
- `eDNA_SampleData_Exploration.Rmd`: I recommend consulting the flowchart to understand this one better. It imports the MiFish and CO1 Universal primer datasets (`primer_tab+taxa.csv`), the Jonah Ventures metadata, and the Ocean Molecular Ecology group metadata. It cleans the metadata, pivots the species detection metabarcoding data so that each sample + species detection combination is a row, and combines the species detection data with the metadata. The species detections now have dates, locations, and collection methods attached. It also imports and filters by the preliminary list of priority species compiled by the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary in collaboration with coastal treaty tribes.
- The pivoting code takes a lot of time and RAM. Be warned. If you are replicating this workflow directly it's probably easier to go straight to `OCNMS_eDNA`, where the pivoted data already exists. 
- Exports cleaned eDNA data to `OCNMS_eDNA`

### Files in `OCNMS_eDNA`
- `EnvironmentalDataxSampleDates.Rmd`: Imports Ocean Molecular Ecology group metadata, extracts DNA sampling dates, and plots these over the full environmental data time series to identify data gaps and visualize the full set of data. This also includes the code for combining the NEMO moored profiler data with the mooring + CTD data.
- `OCNMS_eDNA_Exploration.Rmd`: Imports the cleaned eDNA detections data and the OCNMS species of interest list, filters out only the species detections on the list of interest and exports those. Also calculates eDNA index, a measure of relative abundance based on eDNA reads.
- `Data/Flag` is an internal troubleshooting folder
- `MISSING_DATA.txt` is a note that some crucial files are not included in this GitHub repository because they are too big. You need to run `eDNA_SampleData_Exploration.Rmd` (see above) to generate these files.
- `Oopsie_OCNMS_eDNA_Exploration.Rmd` and `WORRMS.Rmd` are earlier versions of various scripts that I keep around to scavenge code from. Ignore these.

[Hollings Project Workflow-eDNA.pdf](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/16059847/Hollings.Project.Workflow-eDNA.pdf)

### Files in `OCNMS_Project`

- `OCNMS_SpeciesDetections_Cleaning.Rmd`: Imports species detections on the OCNMS species of interest list, makes a variable for presence and absence, and then filters for species that are present in at least 10 samples. **Important output: ``SOI_IDs_Species10Detections.csv`**.
- `eDNAxpO2.Rmd`: The final step! This code combines the eDNA data (`AllReads_Species.csv` from `OCNMS_eDNA_Exploration.Rmd`) with `EnvironmentalData1.csv` (mooring + CTD data from `HypoxiaTimeSeries.Rmd`) by datetime and creates various plots. This is the most up-to-date version of the code, using oxygen saturation percent instead of chemical concentration. Also includes binomial regressions, graphs of hypoxic events, and graphs of species presence and absence over hypoxia. This takes a while to run because of all the statistical tests and plot outputs.
- `PresenceEnvGraphFunction.R` defines a function that is used by `eDNAxpO2.Rmd` to generate the graphs of species presence/absence over oxygen saturation percentage. This function takes a lot of options but is not very widely applicable in its current form, so if you want it to do anything very different from what I've already done with it, you'll need to modify the function itself.
- `eDNAxEnvData.Rmd`: This is an older version of eDNAxpO2.Rmd that I do not recommend using (you can adapt eDNAxpO2 to use DO [dissolved oxygen in mg/L] instead of SatPct [oxygen saturation percent] pretty easily). Cleans eDNA and environmental data so that they are compatible, and joins them by datetime (rounded to the nearest 10 minutes) and plots them on top of each other. This produces `eDNAxEnvData.csv`, a dataset with each species detection in the 4 species of interest with more than 10 detection dates + the associated environmental data from the TH042 mooring.

[Hollings Project Workflow.pdf](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/16059851/Hollings.Project.Workflow.pdf)
